In this lecture, I will provide an overview of the forward pass of artificial neural networks and how
those operations are stored and implemented in the PyTorch library.
Not to be honest, if this is the first time you are ever seeing this material, then you will probably
find the main part of this course to be a little challenging.
So I hope that you already have some exposure to deep learning in PyTorch.
And this lecture is some review and maybe also some additional novel explorations.
This slide is a reminder of the fundamental mechanism of artificial neural networks.
We have a unit here which unfortunately is called a neuron.
It's unfortunate naming because this has literally nothing whatsoever to do with actual biological neurons,
not in their form or their function or their calculations.
But that's how it goes.
Anyway, the x's here are inputs into this unit, and the W's are the weights.
Now this one over here x0 is colored differently because this is called the bias term.
It's an offset that doesn't actually come from anything in the data.
It's just an extra number that gets added to this unit.
That allows the unit to shift its distribution of activations, which turns out to be really useful
for the model's performance.
It's the same thing as an intercept term in a regression.
Anyway, this unit here calculates a weighted sum of these inputs, which is then passed through an
activation function, typically a non-linear activation function like ReLU or Jlu or sigmoid, depending
on the specific network architecture and the goal of this unit.
So this is one unit.
And then in practice, you stitch lots of these units together in different layers of the model.
All the way over here to the left we have the inputs that actually are coming from the data measured
from the outside world.
Maybe these are pixel values from an image.
Maybe they are numerical values corresponding to medical information, or maybe they are numbered tokens
that come from written language.
And then all the way at this side of the model you have some output, which is a prediction that the
model makes about the world.
Again, maybe that's a simple binary prediction, like whether a patient has a disease or not, or maybe
it's a prediction about which word should be printed Did next.
And then all of these layers in the middle are called hidden layers, because they are not directly
connected to data from the outside world.
But here's the thing.
All of these units, I engage in identical calculations.
They're all doing exactly the same thing, which is linear weighted sum, and that is implemented as
the dot product between the inputs, so the x's and the corresponding weights.
And then that is passed through a simple nonlinear activation function.
Of course the values of the inputs and the values of the weights are different for each unit, but the
elementary mathematical operation is exactly the same.
Now notice the direction of the arrows on this graph.
They all go from the input which corresponds to real world data, images or text, and all the outputs
flow to the right towards the output.
So that is called the forward pass where information flows from input.
So initial input to the final output of the deep learning model.
It's also sometimes called the feed forward pass or the forward sweep or something similar.
There's a couple of different terms that people use now with modern architectures.
It's not necessarily the case that all the information only goes forward.
Sometimes there are recurrent connections where a little bit of residual information is fed back from
later layers to earlier layers, but that's more the occasional exception.
Mostly information flows forwards from the initial inputs, from the data, all the way to the output
during the forward pass.
Okay, then we have backpropagation, often abbreviated backprop.
Backprop only occurs during model training, not when you're actually using the model for applications.
So backprop involves adjusting each of these weights, each of these arrows according to the model's
performance.
So if the model is not performing very well, then it will adjust the values of these weights to increase
the performance on the next batch.
But anyway, I'm just focusing on the forward pass in this video.
Now for language models the architecture is a little bit more complicated.
So we have at the inputs a numerical representations of characters and words.
Those are called tokens.
So those are the inputs that are coming in.
Then we have lots of hidden layers.
Now in large language models these have very specific architectures.
They're called attention heads and so on.
But in a conceptual sense they are basically just hidden layers because they do not directly receive
input from the outside world, nor are they directly connected to the outputs of the model.
And then the outputs of a language model correspond to, or at least can be transformed into the probabilities
of selecting tokens, which are then translated into pieces of text like characters and words.
Now the thing is.
That we like to think about these units or artificial neurons.
We think about them as being the atoms of computation in the models.
But in practice, in the actual Python implementation, you don't actually construct these units directly.
They are implicitly created.
Instead, we create the matrices that correspond to all of these weights or all of these arrows here.
And that is implemented through a PyTorch class called linear with a capital L, so nn dot linear.
So when you see non-linear in the code, that's actually creating these matrices that correspond to
the weights, which are all of the arrows that I'm drawing in this diagram.
Okay.
In a moment I will switch to Python.
I will go through a demo of this in code.
But before switching to code, I want to give you a heads up of what you're going to see and what to
look out for.
So we are going to create a class in Python that will instantiate a deep learning model.
Now, just to give you a heads up in advance, this is not an actual language model.
I'm using words that correspond to language model components, but this is a super simple, watered
down collection of random numbers.
The point here is to focus on the code and the mechanics and the operations, not on the actual accuracy
of this model as a top of the line transformer.
So I'll explain each of these lines in more detail in the code, but you can see that we are creating
an input layer, some hidden layers and an output layer.
So that's done in the init section which stands for initialization.
Then down here we have the forward pass which is implementing the weighted linear sum plus non-linearity
that I described a few slides ago.
Now you don't actually literally see any calculations being done in here, but I'm going to show you
how we can reproduce what for example self embedding is actually implementing.
Then we are going to create an instance of that model, inspect its properties and see how to access
some of the parts, like for example, the weights matrices.
The next thing we will do is manually calculate a forward pass using dot products as implemented through
matrix multiplication, and we will see that our manual calculations perfectly reconstruct what PyTorch
is doing using its NN linear class.
Finally, I will illustrate to you the basic concept of using a language model for next token prediction.
What we're going to do is start with some text, translate that text into numbers, push all of those
numbers through the model in a forward pass, and then make predictions for subsequent tokens.
This is literally how actual language models like ChatGPT work.
But of course this is a tiny matrix with random numbers and no training, whereas ChatGPT is absolutely
mammoth and has undergone a mind boggling amount of training.
But understanding all of that is the goal for the rest of the course for now.
Let's switch to Python and go through this code in more detail.
Here I import numpy and matplotlib, as well as PyTorch and some submodules in PyTorch.
Here is where we will create our own class for a simple deep learning model.
Now the thing is, in PyTorch we need to keep track of a lot of little variables, components of the
computational graphs, gradients, and so on.
So there's a lot of methods and properties and attributes that any deep learning model in PyTorch needs
to have that we do not want to have to rewrite every single time we create a new model.
So what we do is inherit a lot of those methods and attributes from MN dot module.
And that's basically what's going on in here.
So this allows us to absorb some important PyTorch features into this class that we're creating without
having to explicitly write them down in this class.
Okay.
And so in this actual class what I define are just two methods.
So init for initialization and forward for forward pass.
In the initialization I create an embedding layer.
This is also a linear layer.
You'll learn later in the course about the relationship between embedding and layer.
But basically this is also a linear layer okay.
And this is going to go from 27 to 127 corresponds to the number of letters in the English language.
So 26 letters plus space.
We're going to use that for pushing data through the model later.
And then 100 is just kind of an arbitrary number that I chose.
That's the number of units in the hidden layers.
And now here I have a tension block uh, in a transformer.
So there's two components to every attention layer which you'll learn about later on in the course.
There's what's called the attention itself.
And then there's the feed forward part, which is often abbreviated as MLP for multi-layer perceptron.
Okay.
So at the input we go from 27 characters, 27 letters and space to a dimensionality of 100.
We stay at 100 by 100, and then we go down to 64.
And then we have this output layer, which for reasons that will become clear to you later, is called
an unembedding Embedding matrix.
And that goes down to 27.
So we start the model with 27 possible inputs.
And we finish the model with 27 possible outputs.
That means that we can input letters into the model.
And the model is going to output letters back.
Okay.
So that's that.
Here is the forward pass.
This is what uh gets calculated when you push data through the model.
So the forward pass involves taking the inputs which are x.
So these are the letters converted into integers.
Those get pushed through the first layer which is the embedding.
Uh so and then this is calculating the weighted linear uh sum.
And then here we get a non-linear activation.
And then we have the attention block.
It's not quite accurate to call this attention block but we're just having some fun here.
Uh so then the data get pushed through this again.
This is linear weighted combination in.
Here are where all the weights get stored.
And here's the nonlinear activation.
And then again through the MLP block the embeddings.
And finally we return the values of y which we are going to convert back into letters.
Okay.
So run that cell.
And here I'm just creating an instance I call this variable LM for language model.
And here we see some information about the model that I just created.
So there's an embedding layer.
And then there's an attention layer an MLP and an embedding.
You are going to see text printed out like this many times throughout the course when we are investigating,
for example, the Bert model, the GPT two model and so on.
Now we can access all of the numbers is stored inside the model by using periods to access these different
properties.
So LM dot MLP that's going to give us access to this.
And let me already show you what this looks like.
So this is what happens when you just write LM.
If you write LM dot MLP you see some more information.
It's a linear layer.
It's 100 coming in and 64 coming out.
It has a bias.
So there are bias terms in here.
And then we can access the weights.
That is the actual matrix that connects all of the neurons in the previous layer to all the neurons
in this layer.
And what is the size of that.
Well we can do that with dot shape.
Now remember that I said up here that there are a lot of methods and properties and so on.
There's just a lot of things that these classes need to have to work within PyTorch.
And I'm not actually literally defining them here.
Instead, I am inheriting them from nn dot module.
So let's see what are all the properties that we have in this variable.
LM so all sorts of stuff in here that I did not define.
This one I defined right.
We defined dot forward.
So that is in here.
And yeah there's just a lot of other things going on here like register load state dict post hook okay
I did not define that in the class.
We inherited that method from PyTorch.
Uh, this actually is important, these uh methods to give us hooks.
We're going to use that in uh, later on in the course when learning about mechanistic interpretability.
And these hooks allow us to access the information, the activations that are being passed through the
model during the forward pass.
Okay.
Um, yeah.
I don't really want to get into this too much, but just to say that, you know, this is an established
class that comes in PyTorch, if you're curious, you can read a little bit more about it.
Okay.
What I want to do now is show you that we can exactly reproduce what is happening up.
Let me get rid of this up here in the model.
Let me go back like this.
Okay.
This is good.
Okay, now I stated, I claimed that when we write linear and then we pass some data into it, some
inputs in variable x, I said that what we're actually doing here is calculating a linear weighted combination
of these inputs x with the weights that are stored in attention and then passing that through a non-linear
activation.
But in here you do not see any additions.
You don't see any multiplications, you don't see dot products or matrix multiplication.
All you see is the name of this component of the model and parentheses.
Okay.
So what is this actually doing?
It is literally just doing a weighted combination of the inputs where the weights come from, these
parameters that we already just looked at here okay.
And so to demonstrate that to you what I'm doing here is coming up with some random input, passing
it through the LM attention.
And then yeah.
So getting that output.
And then what I'm doing is taking that same input here and multiplying it by the weights matrix transpose.
The transpose is just for housekeeping stuff.
It's just the orientation with which PyTorch organizes the weights matrices.
So matrix multiplication uh, plus the bias term, this would be the x0 term that I showed in the slides.
Okay.
And the idea is that we want to see that output one and output two are the same.
If those are the same, then it means that this module here is literally just implementing this weighted
combination plus the bias which is also still weighted combination.
By the way these parentheses here are not necessary for the calculation.
I think it just helps the equation look a little bit nicer.
Okay.
So I hope that all makes sense.
What I'm doing here is just checking that their shapes are the same.
If the sizes of these outputs were different, then we would absolutely know that they are calculating
something different.
Okay.
And now what I'm doing is just plotting one as a function of the other.
And you see that they all fall on the unity line, which means that our manual calculation here is literally,
literally exactly the same as this here.
Okay.
In practice, you don't really want to just do this, partly because there's so many components to the
model.
So many different weights, matrices and also non-linear modules do actually implement more methods.
They do more than just this.
But this is the key mathematical component.
Okay.
So I hope that takes some of the mystery out of that.
Uh, the last thing I want to do in this code demo is show you how to push model, push data through
this model, and get tokens out, which we can transform back into letters.
So I'm importing this string library, which is yeah, just getting out all of the letters here.
So A through Z.
Okay.
Now here is some text that we are going to process I like corn, we all like corn right.
Uh and then let's see I'm going to tokenize the text, which basically just means assign integers to
each of these letters.
So A is going to be zero, B is one, C is two and so on.
And now so that's what I do here.
So I loop through and I get all of the tokens here.
So I'm just finding where in this Ascii lowercase string which is this.
Where do we see the actual letter.
Uh in this text here I'm making it lowercase just so we don't have to deal with uppercase and lowercase.
Here's a special exception for space okay.
So all I'm doing here is translating this text into a sequence of numbers.
And I'll talk much more about that in the course proper.
But basically models cannot process text.
They process numbers.
So that's why we need to transform into numbers.
Once we have those tokens we can actually forward pass through the model.
So very simple.
We input the tokens into the language model and we get some outputs.
So the outputs are of size 11 by 27.
And what does that mean.
Well 27 corresponds to the number of characters that we are representing here.
So 26 letters plus space and 11 is one.
I'm not going to count those.
I'll just do length of tokens okay.
11 is the number of tokens that we have here okay.
So what we're going to do now is plot the output of the model for the first token.
Okay.
So the model did a bunch of processing did a bunch of crazy calculations.
In this case, these are totally nonsensical because they're literally just random numbers.
Uh, and it gave some activation output.
Okay.
So for this first token, it gave us 27 outputs.
Uh, and uh, this is the largest one.
So what are we going to do now?
We are going to say that the model thinks that this token here has the highest activation.
And so this should be the token that comes next.
Right.
That's what these models are doing.
They're taking the current token and the history of tokens.
And they're trying to predict what is the next token.
So this model says here that based on all of everything I've learned about the world from reading the
internet, I think token, let's see, is 15, 16, 17, 18.
I think token number 18 should be the next token.
And 18, of course, maps onto some letter towards the end of the alphabet.
Okay, so that's the idea.
And now what I'm doing is looping through all of the letters and finding the strongest activation from
each individual layer.
So this is done for one letter just for the first token.
And now we're doing it for everything else.
And here we get the output of c c, which I think that's how you pronounce that word.
Obviously this doesn't make any sense, but if you have a much larger language model with more sophisticated
architecture, then this would be the text that the model is producing that you would use in a chatbot,
for example.
I hope you found that code demo enlightening.
The models that we will work with later in this course, and also professional commercial models, are
all basically put together like the model that we just created here.
Of course there's training and lots of additional complexity, but this is the basic idea.
You know, there's always a trade off between implementing something yourself manually versus using
libraries and functions that other people wrote that do a bunch of calculations behind the scenes.
Now, on the one hand, it's really insane to think about recreating everything in deep learning by
writing assembly code, or even writing out all the details of backprop in C.
On the other hand, if you would interact with models at such a high level that all the math and all
the implementations and all the details and the parameters are completely abstracted and hidden from
you, then that's also really not useful for learning.
In fact, that's basically just you interacting with the chatbot without having any idea of what's going
on behind the scenes.
So what I tried to do in this lecture, and also in the rest of the course, is find the balance, where
we are exposing and investigating some of the details about how these models are put together, while
still leaving some lower level details abstracted away, kind of hidden in the PyTorch library.
Anyway, that's enough about Forwardpass.
Let's go to the next lecture and see how backprop is implemented in PyTorch.